So this is where things become
complicated to say the least
because this is where all that
subjectivity comes in, okay?
So we all have different mental models,
we all have different ways of
seeing the world and that very much
affects how we respond to a design.
So interestingly, in one of the breaks,
we were chatting about the stripe
homepage that I showed earlier.
And one of the guys here said, it reminds
me of one of those domain holding pages.
And so as a result, he didn't
really like the design very much.
And that's the kind of thing you're
dealing with when you're trying
to get the aesthetics,
the visuals right on a website.
That in his particular situation,
it reminded him of something else and
so he disliked it as a result.
But that may have been unique to him,
it may or may not be so very confusing.
Like I said, it's not like the simple and
the cleanness and
the binariness of coding where
it either works or it doesn't.
When it comes to design,
it gets complicated.
So let's look at why aesthetics
are important, how we can deal
with them in a way that doesn't lead
to endless debates and iterations?
There is a line of thinking,
that says in actual fact,
aesthetics don't matter that much
when it comes to conversion.
And people hold up sites like
Craigslist which looks hideous or
even Amazon which looks pretty bad, right?
As examples that a site can be highly
successful without good aesthetics.
And to some degree, this is true.
Aesthetics supplement rather than replace
other forms of design, the information or
design, the usability and
the structure and that kind of stuff.
So if you aren't somebody
who's a full time designer,
then that should be quite
encouraging to you.
That it doesn't need to look
beautiful to convert well, right?
It just needs to be easy to use.
That said, I think that aesthetics have
more value than we may be first appreciate
but you have to dive into psychology
a little bit to understand why.
I don't know whether you're familiar
with this idea of the halo effect.
And Steve Jobs famously
kinda represented this.
I'm sure you've heard of the Steve Jobs'
reality distortion field.
That when Steve Jobs was
around talking about an idea,
it suddenly is all seemed to make sense
and it all seemed to be a great idea.
And when he left the room, suddenly, you
realized it wasn't such a great idea and
actually it's gonna be
really difficult to do.
That is an example of the halo effect, and
the halo effect is effectively
when we as human beings
associate to unrelated
factors with one another.
So the typical example was the charisma
of Steve Jobs carried you along and
convinced you that the idea was good,
right?
A more extreme example
of it is that in tests,
it's found that attractive people
are considered a much more trustworthy.
So you're more likely to trust
an attractive person than
a non attractive person.
Which is why you trust every
word from my mouth now.
But that's ridiculous
if you think about it,
because there should be no correlation
between those two whatsoever.
You can be incredibly attractive and
a mass murder, yet, there is something
in our psychology that means we do
associate these kinds of things.
And, of course, the result of that
is we associate, for example,
the attractiveness of a website with
the quality of the product behind it.
If the website looks unprofessional,
if it looks dated or whatever else,
then we might conclude that the product
isn't very loved or cared for.
So the halo effect is an important
effect and does have a knock on value.
And you can see this in a very tangible
and very real way, the power of
aesthetics to actually influence our
buying decisions and our actions.
And you can see it in slot machines,
right?
If you go somewhere like Vegas or
something like that,
you see all these slot machines.
Let's look at it from
a developer point of view.
What is a slot machine?
Well, essentially, a slot machine is
a random number generator, isn't it?
That basically is churning out
a load of random numbers that
ascertain whether you win or lose, right?
So if you had a user experience designer
or a UI designer who just cared
about communicating clearly
in the simplest way possible.
Basically, you'd press a button and
it would either say you've won or
you've lost and that'd be it, right?
In fact, it could be even more
seamless an experience and
that you could walk up to it.
And there could be a sensor on it
that detects you walking up and
just says, you lose or you win on it.
But that wouldn't make
a great experience with it.
And the whole reason that slot
machines are so addictive and so
enjoyable for
some people is because of the aesthetics,
is because of the experience
has been created.
But the sense of control and
engagement and
all of those kinds of factors,
so esthetics do matter.
So then, if we know they matter,
how do we ensure that the aesthetics are
right in order to encourage conversion?
Well, I have a very particular process,
I adopt to get this right.
I don't think I'm a natural
creative designer in may be
the way that some people are.
And so I've kind of reduced it down to
a process that I can kind of follow.
And the first part of my process is
I sit down with my stakeholders and
sometimes with the users as well and
we brainstorm.
Well, what are the words that
we need people to feel in order
to encourage them to act, right?
Do they need to feel
that you're trustworthy?
Do they need to feel friendly towards you?
Do they need to feel positive?
What do they need to feel, or
what do you want them to think about
your brand is another way to put it.
And we ascertain a few words that we all
agree on, that are words that we think or
our users think will resonate
most with the audience,
in order to encourage them to take action.
And then I start designing around those
words exploring different colors,
and typography, and
imagery that I feel represent those words.
And you could do some really cool stuff
with just a little bit of thought, really.
So let's take this example.
This is an example from the smashing
magazine, a membership site.
I don't know whether you're aware of it or
not.
But everything in this is designed
to put you in a good mood,
to make you feel positive.
From the vibrant colors being used
to the smiling cat illustrations,
the fact that all the shapes on
the illustration, curved and gentle.
That the whole feel of it even down to the
text and the way that the text is worded,
and then the little delight or animations
where you roll over them, right?
Everything in that design is to make
you feel positive and why do we care?
Because the more positive we feel,
the lower our cognitive load is,
the more trusting we are,
the more positive we're gonna view
the website because of the halo effect,
et cetera.
So that's a great little bit of using
styling and shapes and animation and
imagery and copy and all those things
together to create a great impression.
And one of the things that I
like in particular about this is
the little animations or rollover, right?
So they're really subtle but
they make you go and actually,
those kinds of own moments so that's nice.
I'll call design delighted and
they're a really good way of putting
people in a positive mindset
about your brand or direction.
And these do take a little bit of
thought and a little bit of fun but
they're all worth exploring.
So humor is quite a good way of making
a connection from one person to another,
building trust and putting people
in a positive state of mind.
So for example,
MailChimp used to be a master at this.
Unfortunately, they've taken
it all the way and gone for
something a bit more soulless,
which is a shame.
But when you want to send an email,
when you are gonna send an email to
all your subscribers, you would have
this hand hanging over a button.
And if you didn't press
the send button after a while,
the hand would start sweating.
And if you still didn't press the button,
it will start shaking a little bit and
seeming quite nervous about it, right?
And that was a great
little bit of delight us.
And it worked so well because not
only was it a kind of moment,
it was a hidden little feature that
you kind of stumbled across me and
made you go, that's nice.
But also it showed a degree of
empathy with the audience that, yes,
sending an email out to a big mailing
list is a little bit scary, right?
So build a great relationship there,
which is good.
And then the other example
they did is when you sent it,
it went to give you a high five, right?
And if you repeatedly clicked
on the hand with your cursor,
the hand will get redder and redder,
like you've constantly high fived it.
Nobody's gonna find that out or
it will take people a long time to find
that out but
then that kinda thing gets shared.
And those kinds of things become
design delight as they're called.
Things like the Toblerone logo, go and
have a look at the Toblerone logo.
And if you look very carefully,
if you look on Google images,
they highlight it for you.
You'll find a hidden bear in that or
the FedEx logo that's got
a hidden arrow in it.
Or there are loads of examples and
these little things that kind
of give a positive attitude and
reduce people's cognitive load
makes them more receptive.
Now you might be thinking, yeah,
but I work at a boring company and
they won't do humor and
it's not appropriate in our situation.
And my response to that is if
the CIA can use humor, you guys can.
The first ever tweet from the CIA was we
can neither confirm nor deny that this is
our first tweet and I think that's
just brilliant, that's brilliant.
Because they brought some humanity to
a faceless government bureaucracy and
whatever you think of
the CIA is irrelevant.
That idea that anybody can introduce some
humor and seem humanity to their brand,
their visuals, their copy,
whatever it be makes such a difference.
That said, it's not always appropriate.
There are times and
places where you shouldn't be using it.
Here's one example,
I don't know whether you're aware of MOO.
There's a website called
moo.com which basically does
your printed business cards and
stickers and stuff like that.
And I received a sticker,
I ordered a sticker book from MOO and
I received this email.
Now I should say that
they use personality and
humor quite a lot on their communications.
So for example, they have big Moo
which is their printing press,
that's kind of the given a character.
And then they have their software
which is called little MOO and
little MOO looks off to you and
is your kind of interaction with them.
So you kind of interact with these
characters which is kind of cute and
differentiate some a little bit from your
average print company which is really
boring.
But I received this email from little MOO.
So hi, I'm little MOO,
we've spoken before.
I'm a piece of software that
manages your order with MOO.
I've done a very bad thing.
Don't worry, your sticker book is fine but
I might have lost the information that
tells the real life people at MOO what
color cover you ordered for
your sticker book.
I might only be a piece of software but
I'm embarrassed and
I do feel like a bit of an idiot.
If you get the wrong cover for your book,
please accept my apologies and know that
someone has fiddled with my insights
to fix them and it won't happen again.
In the meantime,
I hope you love your stickers.
The stickers you have ordered, very
best wishes and sorry again, little MOO.
Now, that's a bad example
of when to use humor.
When things go wrong,
that is not the best moment to use
humor because people are frustrated.
It was made a lot worse by the fact that
they didn't follow my advice from earlier,
which was keep the user informed,
and deal with their questions.
This doesn't tell me, if I get the wrong
sticker book, can I get a refund?
How can I tell you what the right
sticker book cover was, et cetera.
So it very much failed and
I think oftentimes,
I see people using humor
at the wrong time.
The classic example and I blame
designers and developers for this is,
is error pages, right?
Why everybody feels the need to
make star wars puns on error
pages is quite beyond me.
Because that is the very moment that
people are frustrated that they can't
find the page they're looking for
and you're making jokes.
So you need to use some sensitivity
when it comes to this stuff but
remember I said about getting
a list of keywords, right?
So we're gonna take that
list of keywords and
we're gonna do some design work around it.
And we're gonna work out our colors and
our typography and
apply that to our designs.
How do you avoid those endless iterations?
How do that the the design you've come
up with actually does communicate those
keywords?
Well, it's very simple, you ask users.
You do a very basic survey
with a very fancy name.
It's called the semantic
differential survey.
And you can use any survey tool you
want that can display an image and
ask a question, and
you can use any people that you want.
Typically, I use existing
customers of the company or
I post out on their social media channel,
places like that.
And I show them the design and
I asked them a question,
very simple question on
a scale of one to five.
How strongly do you agree with
the statement this design is dot, dot dot?
Whether that be trustworthy,
friendly, positive,
whatever words you come up with and
then see how it ranks.
And if it ranks well, then really your
client or stakeholder, the fact that
they think it looks like a domain holding
page or they don't like the blue or
they want the font moved or
whatever all becomes irrelevant.
Because you prove that the design works.
You've proved that it creates the response
that you're wanting from users.
And you can run a survey like
that in half an hour, 40 minutes,
doesn't take very long to get a load
of people to look at it and vote.
Another option you can have is which I
sometimes use is compare your design mock
up alongside the competitors.
And ask people to select the one
that they find most friendly or
most approachable or most trustworthy or
whatever keywords you've got.
And see whether they pick your
design over the competitors.
If they do,
then you know you're in a good place.
So actually, you can test for
aesthetics, you can test for
design in order to ascertain whether or
not it's working properly.
And there are loads of other
ways of testing a design.
For example, there's something
called a first click test,
which will help ascertain whether
your navigation is right.
So you ask people, where would you click
to go to find x piece of information,
and they click on the graphic and
that where they clicked is recorded.
If people get that first click right,
there is an enormously high chance
that they will then go on to
complete the task correctly.
Another test that you might want to find
out a little bit more about is called
a five second test where you show
somebody a design for a few seconds.
You take the design away and
ask them to recall what they saw.
Did they spot the critical
calls to action?
Did they see the main content?
Did they understand what
the website is about?
That can all help to ascertain
whether the design is right or not.
Now you can run all three of those tests
to survey the first click test and
the second test using a tool
like usability hub.com.
And they've got free account so
you can you do the occasional test
like that very easily with them.
And it proves to stakeholders that
you're in the right direction.
I've shown a lot of eye
simulation over there,
some of eye tracking tests
to show where people look.
You can do that as well.
There are tools out there that no
run a full blown eye tracking study,
which obviously takes a lot of special
equipment and all the rest of it.
But actually takes thousands of
hours of existing eye tracking, and
actually simulates that in a piece
of software that will predict where
people would look in
a real eye tracking study.
With about an 80 to 95% accuracy so it's
not perfect but it's better than nothing.
And again,
you can run your design through it and
see are people looking at
the right place on the page?
So attention insights is one that I
use quite a lot for that, and again,
they've got a free
account you can try out.
So design doesn't need to be
this kind of creative mystery.
In fact, design is very understandable.
It's about following a set of rules and
testing so
that you've got real data so
stakeholders get off your back and
stop hassling you about the fact
that they don't like the pink.
So there's a little bit about design.
Let's recap very quickly the key
takeaways before we take final break and
go into the final session for today.
Those key takeaways is
simplify mercilessly.
If every element on a page needs
to justify its place on that page,
it needs to help improve
conversion in some way.
If it doesn't, then it's out of there.
Secondly, use imagery and
shapes to lead attention,
to show where people should be looking,
to focus them on the right things.
Pay particular attention to calls to
action to make sure they're working hard.
And the people spot them and
consider that post click experience.
Cuz if you don't get that
post click experience right,
you're gonna be in some serious trouble.